you know what's up fully 15 years ago
anarchism was actually much more central
to the animal rights movement than it is
today if you talk to some of the older
cats involved in animal rights they can
remember a time when saving the
rainforest was really a big deal in
shaping ecology and the way people
talked about animal rights whereas today
climate change is probably the main
paradigm you know like today it's mostly
talking about gaseous emissions like
carbon dioxide and methane and so on and
not how many square kilometers of intact
forest cover there is in Brazil or
Borneo or what have you and another big
shift has been the shift away from a
focus on the wilderness on wild animals
as the moral baseline shall we say for
veganism for animal rights of any kind
toward a focus on domesticated animals
on household pets on the idea that
basically farm animals deserve to be
treated the same way household pets do
and as an unexceptional EA deep and
profound change fully 15 years ago a lot
of the heat and action was centered
around primitivism which was really had
its its energy in the UK there were
branches of it going on in the United
States also Suzy was a British and
American phenomenon the last a few years
and it had for a lightning rod a set of
court cases that did get into the
mainstream press referred to as the
Gandalf trials gan da LF and that was a
clever acronym for the green and her
chest and a LF and Animal Liberation
Front trials those went on in the UK
there were a number of other also uh
there was a set of people who protested
against a specific vivisection
institution in the UK the shack 7s haq
stop sir SHAC stop Huntington animal
LT so this is going way back like a lot
of a lot of people are too young to
remember this who are on my youtube
channel but these events I mean again
it's interesting today I see and hear
anarchists attacking veganism as being
pro-establishment in terms of what was
going on in the scene for animal rights
15 years ago if anything you know you
could say animal rights it was really
being shaped and guided and directed by
anarchism and to a largest it was being
discredited by anarchism whereas today I
think maybe some people would feel that
that animal rights activism veganism
have become very sleek and fleek and
corporate and consumerist than what have
you with that haven't said I don't think
anyone alive wishes they could go back
to the old days of the SHAC seven and
the Gandalf trials that's I don't think
anyone on earth that's any nostalgia for
that period and there's an article you
can look up all this stuff still exists
in the internet somewhere the back
issues of green anarchist magazine are
archived from the internet there is an
article by steven booth called
primitivism an illusion with no future
now this is worth talking about thinking
about reflecting on just in terms of how
far we have come through stumbling
blindly I mean there's absolutely no
sense in which this was an intentional
progression or plan to change in animal
rights and via culture I mean it's
totally non coordinated me this again
why say like there is no movement there
is no community and so on it's not like
you can interview someone who ever sat
down with this as a strategy but
fashions and fads come and go and very
often the people who are most intensely
interested in intensely moved by
intensely involved with those fats they
themselves have the least control over
where they're coming from where they're
going to what happens next now among the
big differences
haha primitivism was openly pro violence
anti-technology and anti civilization so
for those of you who are too young to
remember this that is shockingly
different from what's hot and
fashionable in veganism animal rights
today admits it's not only completely
different from pedda peopled ethical
dream animals at that time they were in
competition with pettah i mean green
anarchists those primitive estanque errs
they were you know presenting their
solution to the problems of the world
really in direct competition with though
animal welfare is like like p ETA and
they were frozen themselves as the more
radical and challenging way to engage
with it and solve these issues uh you
know they actually use slogans like
smash civilization and i mean again
what's what's interesting to note from
my perspective is that whereas today we
are mostly holding up an image of a
california-based lifestyle a high
quality of life with a high level of
self-indulgence as the new normal being
proposed that everyone can live a
certain life of affluence with a certain
type of exercise physical fitness
physical beauty and a certain kind of
diet that this can be the future for all
of humanity by contrast the primitive
ests they actually looked for their new
normal in Papua New Guinea and
indigenous peoples of Australia and held
up and celebrated the type of relatively
brutal life that those people had prior
to contact with European civilization
now this also comes back to the question
of sustainability again these things
have changed so much simply what
ideological terms were using and what
questions were asking will shape the
political answers we come to but back in
those days 15 years ago sustainability
was really one of the hot terms at the
United Nations and ever
around the world and ultimately the
primitive ests were saying these tribal
peoples ie Papua New Guinea as described
by British anthropologists none of these
none of these people have experienced
actually living in Papua New Guinea
these people are showing us what a truly
sustainable life is like this is what
really living off the land is like this
is what living in the in the forest is
like and this is what we have to be
idealizing and trying to work our way
back to that's the new normal we should
be progressing towards and within that
of course they're looking at sort of the
end of the domestication of animals and
also the end of the domestication of
human beings so as you imagine this is
quite a provocative package of
ideological values and it's all wrapped
up with the threat of violence it's all
wrapped up with over-the-top radicalism
and with the net direct connections to
the AL f themselves so England's a LF I
believe they are still listed as a
terrorist organization but back in those
days they didn t have their roots in a
violent action they prided themselves on
a certain kind of terrorism and
government authorities treated them
accordingly and I think it's fair to say
they probably did discredit all kinds of
moderate and constructive forms of
activism and what have you so equally
interesting to include here is simply
how the story ends which is that it just
fizzles out I think almost all of the
public interest in and sympathy for the
green anarchist group the primitive
estroux was rooted in their repression
so by this I mean as much in as much as
there were ongoing trials court cases in
as much as people were being unfairly
punished for protesting against
vivisection like Huntington animal
cruelty they had public attention and
public sympathy simply because they were
being unfairly persecuted by the state
authorities and when that ended there
no basis for anyone to sympathize with
this idiot ear movement that's also a
kind of interesting puzzle that's worth
really thinking about and you have to
look at the process and the product and
the type of participation these groups
rely on ultimately for their members
these groups had nothing to offer aside
from the opportunity to publish articles
that were really over the top you know
calling for you know smashing the
government smashing you know and into
civilization all these you know kind of
slogans that were so for the top uh why
do I raise this now I mean look as I say
fads are going to come and go within
animal rights I do not feel veganism is
a fad I hope it's here to stay i hope it
lasts as a category i think there's a
fundamental progress in having moved
from vegetarianism to veganism as the
kind of entry requirement for being
serious about animal rights and ecology
or both hopefully but I think with
nobody really noticing it with nobody
drawing a line on a map or turning a new
chapter in a book we switched from a
whole discourse that really cared about
wilderness and even moderate ecologists
and so on back then forest habitat
though rainforest save the rainforest
those were the big looming paradigms
around everything in ecology and indeed
even vegetarianism was promoted by
saying save the rainforest stop eating
beef that causes the rain forced to be
cut down etc etc and again that's really
much more based on lumber and less based
on gaseous emissions but the idea of
what is the proper relationship between
human beings and animals in that
paradigm is actually one of fear and
mistrust
and taking out a map and saying okay
that area over there is for the
elephants and tigers and this area over
here is for human beings and
fundamentally our job as human beings is
to leave the animals alone is not to
haunt them to extinction not to hunt it
not to chop down their forests but it is
also not to domesticate them not to use
them as decorations for carpets not to
use them as you know warm-blooded toy
plaything teddy bear not to use them to
entertain or children or what have you
there was a really hard edge element of
anti domestication that as I say was
rooted both in a repudiation
domesticated animals and the
domestication of human beings of
questionings in what ways modern Western
technological civilization had
domesticated us that we had lost our
edge our vitality and so on now say say
I don't think anyone is sincerely
nostalgic for that period I'm not but it
is interesting to look back and see how
far things have shifted from the raucous
edgy provocative sincerely an artistic
underpinnings of animal rights in that
era to the present day when people think
it is really controversial and
outrageous for me to be questioning
activism that is based on you know
bikinis bicycles permanent vacation a
lifestyle of self-indulgence when I am
considered edgy and provocative for you
know talking about doing paperwork at
City Hall as a more meaningful form of
political protest in contrast to
promoting health diet and as say what I
can only describe sincerely as a kind of
lifestyle of self-indulgence so we've
come a long way and as they say if we're
really being honest about it we have
come a long way stumbling
with no particular objective and no
particular sense of direction so far